A Job Well done
Dhuki, the gardener, was clearing up the weeds that grew in profusion around the old disused well.
He was an old man, skinny and bent and spindly-legged; but he had always been like that; his strength
lay in his wrists and in his long, tendril-like fingers. He looked as frail as a petunia, but he had the
tenacity of a vine.
‘Are you going to cover the well?’ I asked. I was eight, a great favourite of Dhuki. He had been the
gardener long before my birth; had worked for my father, until my father died, and now worked for my
mother and step-father.
‘I must cover it, I suppose,’said Dhuki. ‘That’s what the “Major sahib” wants. He’ll be back any
day, and if he finds the well still uncoverd he’ll get into one of his raging fits and I’ll be looking for
another job!’
The ‘Major sahib’ was my step-father, Major Summerskill. A tall, hearty, back-slapping man, who
liked polo and pig-sticking. He was quite unlike my father. My father had always given me books to
read. The Major said I would become a dreamer if I read too much, and took the books away. I hated
him; and did not think much of my mother for marrying him.
‘The boy’s too soft,’ I heard him tell my mother. ‘I must see that he gets riding lessons.’
But, before the riding lessons could be arranged, the Major’s regiment was ordered to Peshawar.
Trouble was expected from some of the frontier tribes. He was away for about two months. Before
leaving, he had left strict instructions for Dhuki to cover up the old well.
‘Too damned dangerous having an open well in the middle of the garden,’ my step-father had said.
‘Make sure that it’s completely covered by the time I get back.’
Dhuki was loth to cover up the old well. It had been there for over 50 years, long before the house
had been built. In its walls lived a colony of pigeons. Their soft cooing filled the garden with a lovely
sound. And during the hot, dry, summer months, when taps ran dry, the well was always a dependable
source of water. The bhisti still used it, filling his goatskin bag with the cool clear water and
sprinkling the paths around the house to keep the dust down.
Dhuki pleaded with my mother to let him leave the well uncovered.
‘What will happen to the pigeons?’ he asked.
‘Oh, surely they can find another well,’said my mother. ‘Do close it up soon, Dhuki. I don’t want
the Sahib to come back and find that you haven’t done anything about it.’
My mother seemed just a little bit afraid of the Major. How can we be afraid of those we love? It
was a question that puzzled me then, and puzzles me still.
The Major’s absence made life pleasant again. I returned to my books, spent long hours in my
favourite banyan tree, ate buckets of mangoes, and dawdled in the garden talking to Dhuki.
Neither he nor I were looking forward to the Major’s return. Dhuki had stayed on after my mother’s
second marriage only out of loyalty to her and affection for me; he had really been my father’s man.
But my mother had always appeared deceptively frail and helpless, and most men, Major
Summerskill included, felt protective towards her. She liked people who did things for her.
‘Your father liked this well,’said Dhuki. ‘He would often sit here in the evenings, with a book in
which he made drawings of birds and flowers and insects.’
I remembered those drawings, and I remembered how they had all been thrown away by the Major
when he had moved into the house. Dhuki knew about it too. I didn’t keep much from him.
‘It’s a sad business closing this well,’said Dhuki again. ‘Only a fool or a drunkard is likely to fall
into it.’
But he had made his preparations. Planks of sal wood, bricks and cement were neatly piled up
around the well.
‘Tomorrow,’said Dhuki. Tomorrow I will do it. Not today. Let the birds remain for one more day.
In the morning, baba, you can help me drive the birds from the well.’
On the day my step-father was expected back, my mother hired a tonga and went to the bazaar to
do some shopping. Only a few people had cars in those days. Even colonels went about in tongas.
Now, a clerk finds it beneath his dignity to sit in one.
As the Major was not expected before evening, I decided I would make full use of my last free
morning, I took all my favourite books and stored them away in an outhouse, where I could come for
them from time to time. Then, my pockets bursting with mangoes, I climbed into the banyan tree. It
was the darkest and coolest place on a hot day in June.
From behind the screen of leaves that concealed me, I could see Dhuki moving about near the well.
He appeared to be most unwilling to get on with the job of covering it up.
‘Baba!’ he called, several times; but I did not feel like stirring from the banyan tree. Dhuki grasped
a long plank of wood and placed it across one end of the well. He started hammering. From my
vantage point in the banyan tree, he looked very bent and old.
A jingle of tonga bells and the squeak of unoiled wheels told me that a tonga was coming in at the
gate. It was too early for my mother to be back. I peered through the thick, waxy leaves of the tree,
and nearly fell off my branch in surprise. It was my step-father, the Major! He had arrived earlier than
expected.
I did not come down from the tree. I had no intention of confronting my step-father until my mother
returned.
The Major had climbed down from the tonga and was watching his luggage being carried on to the
verandah. He was red in the face and the ends of his handlebar moustache were stiff with brilliantine.
Dhuki approached with a half-hearted salaam.
‘Ah, so there you are, you old scoundrel!’ exclaimed the Major, trying to sound friendly and
jocular. ‘More jungle than garden, from what I can see. You’re geting too old for this sort of work,
Dhuki. Time to retire! And where’s the Memsahib?’
‘Gone to the bazaar,’said Dhuki.
‘And the boy?’
Dhuki shrugged. ‘I have not seen the boy, today, Sahib.’
‘Damn!’said the Major. ‘A fine homecoming, this. Well, wake up the cook-boy and tell him to get
some sodas.’
‘Cook-boy’s gone away,’said Dhuki.
‘Well, I’ll be double-damned,’said the major.
The tonga went away, and the Major started pacing up and down the garden path. Then he saw
Dhuki’s unfinished work at the well. He grew purple in the face, strode across to the well, and started
ranting at the old gardener.
Dhuki began making excuses. He said something about a shortage of bricks; the sickness of a niece;
unsatisfactory cement; unfavourable weather; unfavourable gods. When none of this seemed to satisfy
the Major, Dhuki began mumbling about something bubbling up from the bottom of the well, and
pointed down into its depths. The Major stepped on to the low parapet and looked down. Dhuki kept
pointing. The Major leant over a little.
Dhuki’s hand moved swiftly, like a conjurer’s making a pass. He did not actually push the Major.
He appeared merely to tap him once on the bottom. I caught a glimpse of my step-father’s boots as he
disappeared into the well. I couldn’t help thinking of Alice in Wonderland, of Alice disappearing
down the rabbit hole.
There was a tremendous splash, and the pigeons flew up, circling the well thrice before settling on
the roof of the bungalow.
By lunch time — or tiffin, as we called it then — Dhuki had the well covered over with the
wooden planks.
‘The Major will be pleased,’said my mother, when she came home. ‘It will be quite ready by
evening, won’t it, Dhuki?’
By evening, the well had been completely bricked over. It was the fastest bit of work Dhuki had
ever done.
Over the next few weeks, my mother’s concern changed to anxiety, her anxiety to melancholy, and
her melancholy to resignation. By being gay and high-spirited myself, I hope I did something to cheer
her up. She had written to the Colonel of the Regiment, and had been informed that the Major had
gone home on leave a fortnight previously. Somewhere, in the vastness of India, the Major had
disappeared.
It was easy enough to disappear and never be found. After several months had passed without the
Major turning up, it was presumed that one of two things must had happened. Either he had been
murdered on the train, and his corpse flung into a river; or, he had run away with a tribal girl and was
living in some remote corner of the country.
Life had to carry on for the rest of us. The rains were over, and the guava season was approaching.
My mother was receiving visits from a colonel of His Majesty’s 32nd Foot. He was an elderly,
easy-going, seemingly absent-minded man, who didn’t get in the way at all, but left slabs of chocolate
lying around the house.
‘A good Sahib,’ observed Dhuki, as I stood beside him behind the bougainvillaea, watching the
colonel saunter up the verandah steps. ‘See how well he wears his sola topee! It covers his head
completely.’
‘He’s bald underneath,’ I said.
‘No matter. I think he will be all right.’
‘And if he isn’t,’ I said, ‘we can always open up the well again.’
Dhuki dropped the nozzle of the hose pipe, and water gushed out over our feet. But he recovered
quickly, and taking me by the hand, led me across to the old well, now surmounted by a three-tiered
cement platform which looked rather like a wedding cake.
‘We must not forget our old well,’ he said. ‘Let us make it beautiful, baba. Some flower pots,
perhaps.’
And together we fetched pots, and decorated the covered well with ferns and geraniums. Everyone
congratulated Dhuki on the fine job he’d done. My only regret was that the pigeons had gone away.
